[Music]
hello I'm Adrian finigan and this is
counting the cost on elzer your weekly
look at the world of business and
economics this week nothing to return to
Israel's war on Gaza has wiped out
entire neighborhoods and reduced
businesses to Rubble so who compensates
Palestinians for the
destruction also this week enshrined in
Germany's Constitution the so-called
debt break has sparked a budget crisis
calls are growing for borrowing limits
to be relaxed plus China and Saudi
Arabia agree on their first currency
swap while many nations are increasingly
moving away from the US dollar to settle
[Music]
trade Israel's relentless bombardment of
Gaza has killed and injured thousands of
Palestinians the human cost is
innumerable the toll on infrastructure
is massive put simply absolute
destruction and a lack of basic
requirements to sustain life entire
neighborhoods homes schools hospitals
churches and mosques have all been
targeted whoever runs Gaza after the war
ends will have to rebuild the strip and
create a functioning economy while many
Palestinians who've managed to see what
remains of their homes during a brief
Lain attacks was shocked at the scale of
the
damage as you can see thousands of
residential units were destroyed the
same with other residential complexes in
the north where to go where to sleep
this was my house and now my family and
I are homeless many are still buried
under the debris I cannot even pick some
of my clothes from under the rubble to
put on my back however we are not
leaving we're holding our ground even if
I live in a tent I will not abandon my
homeland my memories my home is all my
memories I would never let it go I lived
for 23 years here I will stay in it even
if only a small part of it
remains it's a massive shock it took me
a lifetime to build this house for me
and my brothers and just like that I'm
back to square
one we are a family of four and our
house is made up of four floors the
ground floor is a commercial shop my
brother lives with his family in the
first floor while the other brother on
the second my family and I live on the
fourth floor we're now sitting in what
was once the kitchen that was the fridge
and that the oven this is the only area
where we could sit the rest is a total
wreck well the UN special rorer on the
right to adequate housing balak Krishan
Raja gopal has denounced Israel's
widespread bombing of homes and
infrastructure in Gaza in a recent
report he said carrying out hostilities
with the knowledge that they will
systematically destroy and damage
civilian housing and infrastructure
rendering an entire city such as Gaza
City uninhabitable for civilians is a
war crime multiple sources have released
figures on the extent of damage to
infrastructure satellite analysis by two
researchers at the CNY Graduate Center
and Oregon State University shows that
nearly half of all buildings across
Northern Gaza have been damaged or
destroyed the UN says that nearly 45,000
housing units have been demolished out
of the strips 36 hospitals 28 are no
longer of functioning 279 educational
facilities have been affected depriving
more than
625,000 students of the basic right to
education bakeries and Mills in the
northern part of the strip have been
brought to a standstill due to
structural damage and the lack of fuel
and flour water facilities across Gaza
have also been targeted well the latest
conflict is estimated to have cost much
more than any of the four previous Wars
on Gaza the 3-we war that began in
December 2008 and ended in January 2009
caused destruction amounting to $2
billion that's according to the World
Bank Hamas says the eight days of
Israeli attacks in 2012 cost Gaza 1.2
billion nearly $6 billion was estimated
to be the cost of rebuilding Gaza after
the 2014 War and the damage and economic
losses from the Israeli attack in 2021
amounted to more than half a billion
doar Western countries have considered
using Frozen Russian assets to rebuild
Ukraine last year Poland demanded more
than $1 trillion in World War II
reparations from Germany also in 2022
Iraq completed the payment of more than
$52 billion in compensation for damage
caused by its 1990 invasion of Kuwait so
who pays for the destruction in Gaza at
how much joining us now is tamama Kut is
an assistant professor in public policy
and administration at the Doha Institute
for Graduate Studies good to have you
with us on on counting the cost um is
Gaza even going to be habitable after
all of this given the scale of the
destruction that we've just
outlined
um yes there is a chance it would be
habitable if an urgent early recovery
and and uh reconstruction plan is
initiated immediately after the end of
this war so there there still there is a
chance of course I mean I mean gazin
have nowhere to go so there is no plan B
for gazin so we have to believe that it
has to be a habitable and and and a
normal place like any other place in the
world and this depends on the
International Community as well to
create normal conducive uh social
economic conditions for gazans to stay
in Gaza and this and this and and and by
default this is related on to how will
they uh plan and implement the the
Reconstruction Plan of Gaza after this
war ends who who makes those plans how
much is it are those plans going to cost
is the rebuilding going to cost and who
pays so just to give uh the viewers a
perspective like you know the the in
2009 the first reconstruction uh uh
operation there were donors after the
Shalit war in Gaza donors bedge uh
nearly $5 billion in 2012 uh cast lead
operation there was 3 two pledges as
well so given the size the sheer size of
construction now we literally talking
about something similar to I I would
call it a new martial plan for for Gaza
this might exceed 30 billions plus you
know so it's a huge amounts of money uh
of course Palestinians will not pay if
if we live in a fair and ethical world
the Israelis have to pay because they
caus this this destruction and I still
they should not I I and I believe that
there should be accountability when it
comes to this because most of the
destruction that happened in G this is
private ownership and
also uh Aid and donations that came to
support the two- State Solutions since
the beginning of also 1994 so we're
talking about building hospitals
government premises Ministries civil
infrastructure name it mainly these are
donors money when I say donors I say
Western donors Arab donors and
international donors but Western donors
especially the Europeans the EU the EU
is one of the largest donors to the
Palestinian Authority uh followed by I
mean the Americans Japan and then Arab
donors you know the the gulf countries
you know Islamic
countries um so this is tax money when
it comes to Western countries this is
tax money this is tax money being wasted
because of Israel's actions and Israel
had has no limits when it comes to this
because the the the the subject or the
issue of protecting a dividends which is
Aid you know that should contribute to
peace should be brought into to be
discussed on the table by the donors and
Israelis I mean because there is donors
fatigue now many donors now they're
tired from seeing their money being
wasted in every eruption of conflict or
a circle of violence in the pal in in
occupied Palestine so there has to be a
discussion on this now I mean especially
in the future of Gaza after this war
ends Don should be very blunt about it
and say we will invest we will of course
support Palestinians to recover uh but
there has to be conditions this time
it's not going to be free Aid especially
to the Israel
is Israel going to be forced to pay
though I mean who who's going to who's
going to force Israel to pay if it's
decided that isra Israel should should
be paying well here we talk about the
just the just World a just International
System I mean if the if Iraq had to pay
for Kuwait as you've mentioned exactly
and if if if the idea of uh SE using
seized Russian assets Frozen Russian
assets to Al to to rebuild Ukraine then
we have a president that it should
continue this way you know correct but
it needs International will are Western
countries main Western countries ready
to use this on Israel or not I I'm not
sure to be honest but I I if if we live
in a just World it should happen Israel
should be accountable not only for the
destruction also for human losses all
these civilians who have lost their
wives they they have to be compensated
for the I was going to ask you about you
talked about personal ownership as well
a lot of a lot of the property that's
been that's been destroyed was was
personally owned privately owned this is
not businesses or or organizations I
mean even if they could have got
insurance in in Gaza it wouldn't have
paid out because this is an act of War
so surely people need to be compensated
for their individual loss it's not just
of of of property but for for lives lost
as well yes yes exactly exactly I mean
there's for just I mean just for your
viewers to know there's no insurance in
Gaza I mean insurance is not a scheme
implemented in Gaza or gazans know about
so same like in other countries in the
world so these are people I mean who
psychologically they have to suffer for
the the loss of their loved ones their
houses their properties their means of
income uh so so yes we so I mean I mean
I mean it's hard to me even to talk
about financially compensation people
who have lost their loved ones I mean
money will not bring the the The Lost
Ones back to life correct I mean but at
least that's the least donors should do
at least to to to to to try to help them
to get back to to their lives also and
you talked about donors U footing the
bill for some of the of of the
Reconstruction costs but but donors are
not really going to be willing to to to
invest to put more money to in into Gaza
if 's a danger of this happening again
so that there has to be a political
solution alongside a financial one yes
Adrian and this is an excellent point I
mean uh yes I mean it it would be
another waste of resources and energy if
if if money comes in a fragile context
again now but doesn't mean that that
donors should stop intervening now I'm
all in I'm all in for humanitarian Aid
to kick in now and to be even to be
upscaled humanitarian Aid which is
necessary to keep people alive it's
water food food shelter clothes name it
I mean so this is a must you cannot
leave people alone in this situation
once this war is over and it again and
this is a big question because we don't
know everyone is talking about a future
arrangements to this to govern Gaza or
Gaza after the war we don't know what's
going to happen what's the political
outcome of this war meaning if Hamas is
still going to be in power or not it
will step down and leave another entity
beat a technocrat government or
government run by the be by the palestin
authority rule Gaza we don't know I mean
there are so many scenarios that are
being discussed but but but but we don't
know which scenario will be the feasible
one the most feasible one because the
war is not over yet so however if we
reach to a scenario where let's say
Hamas is not involved in governing Gaza
uh this will be a relief for many
Western donors who have uh refused or
who have been very shy of supporting
Palestinians because of hamas's control
of let's say governance governance
institutions correct uh other donors
like let's say Arab donors Muslim donors
they don't have any conditions they
support any projects so let's say if if
if if if if a ministerial building is is
damaged now or was was bombed during
this war some Arab donors will say I can
rebuild it I have no problems even if
it's run by Hamas or will be run by
Hamas but then European donors Western
donors will say no no no this is a noo
for me if I'm going to build this and it
will be used by officially by Hamas
authorities they will say no this is a
nog go for me I'll just focus on
humanitarian Aid then we'll end up with
the situation of fragmenting Aid and
this will not go well for the
Palestinians because after this war and
the large scale of Destruction we need a
systematic comprehensive reconstruction
plan that really tackles everything
together and it's not about just
reconstructing what have been uh bombed
or damaged it's about creating a
sustainable future for Gaza which means
Israeli Israeli uh control measures you
know blockades
uh have to be also addressed I mean
Israel cannot keep its control over the
borders and also its control over let's
say the Reconstruction process by
delaying materials vetting materials
vetting beneficiaries of of of Aid you
know because Israel has a famous history
of doing this delaying these
construction materials so we need a
sense of normality so it's about
creating a sustainable future of Gaza
not just addressing the immediate
outcomes of for but also creating an
environment for Gaza to be a normal
country a normal strip like any other
countries in the world that's that's the
issue T great to talk to you on counting
the cost my pleasure many thanks toed
for being with us my pleasure my
pleasure now in Germany rules limit how
much debt the government can take on the
Constitution camps budget deficits at
0.35% of GDP except in an extreme
emergency the so-called debt break was
enacted in 2009 and was meant to
stabilize public finances after the
global financial crisis but a strict
interpretation of the rule by the
nation's top Court struck down billions
of dollars in planned spending sparking
a budget crisis now calls are growing to
abandon the borrowing limits as Dominic
Kane reports from
Berlin this is how Germany's finance
ministry tries to explain its schen bmza
or debt break governments can't borrow
much more than a third of 1% of GDP each
year except in extreme emergencies in
theory the Manor ministers is pretty
simple live within your means in
practice it's proved anything but it was
Angela Merle's government that enshrined
the debt break into law during the
credit crunch they felt it necessary to
Anchor something in the Constitution
that put a debt break on spending to
show responsibility and of course uh
Germany has always sort of wagged a
finger at other countries in the EU that
um overspent um you know and broke EU
you debt rules but now the finger is
being wagged at the government here in
Berlin because when Finance Minister
Christian lintner tried to use unspent
money borrowed to fight covid to finance
climate change policies the Supreme
Court in khu ruled that to be
unconstitutional leaving a multi-billion
dollar hole in this year's budget and
causing consternation in capital markets
German budgetary policy is a bit like
satirical reality it is important that
we get back on reliable ground
relatively quickly it is unacceptable
that one of the largest industrialized
Nation allows itself to pursue a
budgetary policy that is
constitutionally questionable the
political effect of the khua ruling is
also profound something Olaf Shotz
himself acknowledged in
Parliament this ruling creates a new
reality for the federal government and
for all current and future federal and
state governments a reality however that
makes it more difficult to achieve
important and widely shared goals for
our
country having improvised a solution for
2023 ministers are now having to work
out next year's budget and the remote
possibility of a $220 billion shortfall
which could mean the need to slash
spending there might be some cuts for
benefits for the Richer people in the
society that could be one way out and
that would um then they would also have
some smaller budget cuts for the poorer
households in
Germany one analyst says behind closed
doors political leaders here believe the
law should be made more suitable to
today's realities many politicians agree
that we need a change of that clause or
an integration of this investment Clause
into the into the debt uh break or maybe
even get rid of it and come up with
something new which is more appropriate
to solve uh the the challenges uh we are
facing in Germany but to do that the
coalition government will need the help
of the main opposition party in both
houses of Parliament and so far at least
its leader seems to favor new elections
over new laws Dominic Kain for counting
the cost
Berlin China is Saudi Arabia's top
trading partner and the largest buyer of
its oil trade between the two Nations
amounted to more than $6 billion in 2022
their relationship broadened last year
leaders of the Nations signed a
comprehensive strategic partnership
during a visit by the Chinese leader
xiin ping to Riad the agreement worth
billions of dollars included
collaboration on infrastructure projects
and technology and was hailed by Beijing
as an Epoch making milestone in the
development of Chinese Arab relations
the two Nations have recently moved to
strengthen Financial cooperation 2
they've signed a local currency swap
agreement worth nearly $7 billion which
will be valid for 3 years and could be
extended several countries in the Middle
East signed similar agreements with
China over the past decade including
Qatar the United Arab Emirates and Egypt
Beijing is believed to have the largest
network of currency swaps with at least
40 countries well currency swaps are
agreements whereby central banks lend
and borrow each other's currencies on a
specified date they then exchange the
money back at an agreed interest rate
China's swaps are seen as part of of its
push to internationalize the Yuan Global
Central Banks tapped a record amount of
the Chinese currency in foreign exchange
swaps lines in the first quarter of the
year the outstanding balance of all
foreign currency swaps was more than $15
billion by the end of March that's
according to the People's Bank of China
the jump came after a growing number of
countries moved to settle their trade
with China in local currencies in a bid
to reduce their Reliance on the US
dollar the green Bank Remains the most
traded currency by far but its share of
foreign reserves the amount of dollars
that countries put by for a rainy day
has declined to a record low of
58% last year by comparison China's Yuan
stands at less than 3% the Chinese
currency is still behind the Euro the
Japanese Yen and the British pound well
joining us here in Doha is while mm who
is the financial Market strategist lead
at the global multi-asset brokerage
group exes good to have you with us
while $7 billion is a huge amount to the
likes of you and I and anyone watching
but in global economy terms it's a
relatively small amount so how
significant is this currency swap
Arrangement between China and Saudi
Arabia um thank you Adrien for the
invite first uh actually it's uh quite
good for a start since uh we know like
China is looking forward to expand its
presence in the in the region and uh of
course Saudi and the uh the economy
recently it's been performing well for
the past few years since Co and there's
a lot of plans for expansion and the
vision for 2030 so definitely it's a
good uh um it's a good arrangement uh
going forward as as you mentioned it's a
three years Arrangement and could be
even but but who's it better for you say
that saud's economy is is on the rise
China's at the moment is in is in is in
a spot of bother isn't it actually both
of them would benefit and a certain uh
certain thresholds so for example if we
take into consideration for Saudi the
the export of Saudi Arabia towards China
they've been increasing at a pace of at
least 133% for the past years every year
and this is something very uh uh crucial
to have such an arrangement on the other
side China is looking to secure its
energy uh uh supplies and and we know
that China is a top importer for for
Saudi energy uh so so this is definitely
this definitely plays a vital role in
order to expand this relation it started
with it it it could expand to other
sectors there's a lot of uh
opportunities we know that Chinese
economy is the second in the world
they're trying to expand they're trying
to recover as much from covid and of
course Saudi Arabia could find a lot of
opportunities in the Chinese economy
while also through the vision of 2030
through the belt and uh uh the belt and
Road initiatives also China is looking
for more strong Partners like Saudi
Arabia so what are the implications of
this this this new found relationship
between the two countries for the rest
of us for the rest of actually like
having more of these two relationships
it's uh it's better for the global
economy because this would facilitate
trade and it also would make it easier
to do more uh Investments and this would
create opportunity so of course having
uh such uh such Arrangements is good for
the for the economy and if we see a lot
of these Arrangements happening you
mentioned that China has at least the
network of 40 countries with these
arrangements so this is also
facilitating business more and more and
this should play a good role in
expanding the role of the Chinese
economy and the global economy and uh
this would in turn come back to good
opportunities and what does this
currency swap a arangement and others
like it with China mean for the US
dollar the green Bank actually a lot of
uh a lot of parties are excited about
what do we call dollarization what we
heard about it recently a lot on the
media however we're still a little bit
far away from that if we just look at
some figures still the US uh dollar
reserves are around 59% of global
reserves of central banks still the
trade uh uh uh funded by the dollar were
around 84% this year yes China's such
Arrangement that China is doing with a
lot of counterparties are increasing its
role and the internal
internationalization of the Yuan however
was still very far away from just
reaching where the dollar is at the
moment okay so Saudi Arabia expected to
join the the bricks nations in in in
early in 2024 what what do you make of
that is that a natural fit for Saudi
Arabia actually it's uh it's a good uh
it's a good step because bricks are
looking to especially if you look at
India and China they're looking to
secure their energy supplies and this is
one second there's a lot of uh chances
for uh for for these parties to uh
contribute to the perform to better
performance of each other we know
recently everyone is looking to expand
their their economy especially postco
and all these we're looking at China
we're looking at India and even with the
plans that Saudi Arabia has for a vision
2030 it needs such good uh strategic
members that could help in the
prosperity of the Kingdom's economy do
you think we could ever see Saudi oil
sold EX in Yuan uh it's
um like like the Chinese were were
asking for that and you mentioned the
the Chinese president was in ch in Saudi
Arabia last year and he also stressed on
that however it's still not that easy
this currency swap agreement is starting
for non oil trades it could in the
future turn into that but going into
that way it needs a lot of geopolitical
Assessments but could you ever see see
the day in is it is it in the distant
future will it ever happen or the the
near future where by a currency like the
Yuan would replace the dollar as the
preferred International currency of of
Last Resorts it could happen but not in
the foreseeable future it could takes
years and decades for for a currency to
replace the dollar because of of many
factors however yes after the the crisis
that we've seen in Europe uh a lot of
countries are looking to reduce the
Reliance and dependency on the US dollar
and and these initiatives they are part
of this uh uh winding of the dependency
and Reliance however just going into a a
currency that would replace the dollar
at the moment and the foreseeable future
it's a bit hard well it's been really
good to talk to you on counted the cost
same year I I think I understood all
that as well so thanks for explaining it
so well to us many thanks indeed pleas
pleasure thank you and that's our show
for this week get in touch with us if
you want to comment on anything that
you've seen you can tweet me on X I'm at
a finegan try to use the # AJ CC when
you do or you could can drop us a line
counting the cost at al.net is our email
address as always there's plenty more
for you online at
al.com CC that takes you straight to our
page and there you'll find individual
reports links and entire episodes for
you to catch up on that's it for this
edition of counting the cost I'm Adrian
finigan in Doha from the whole team here
thanks for being with us the news on
aler is
[Music]
next